The Joe Rogan experience.
Do you have any high hopes for things like CRISPR things where
there's going to be genetic alterations and they are starting to do
some experience. You have a big smile on your face right now.
So I'll let you talk, go ahead. Tell me what's up. Uh, well.
Uh, so I'm a geneticist and I'm just down the hall from George Church.
Who's in my department at Harvard, and I'm a big believer in CRISPR,
uh, in the sense that it will revolutionize medicine. Now, right now.
Explain it to people who don't know what it means.
So CRISPR is, uh, uh, an acronym for basically a,
a system that is from bacteria that they use to, uh,
kill and destroy the DNA of invading organisms, like a virus.
But we can now use that system to cut and change our own genomes.
It's basically a,
a DNA cutting enzyme that doesn't cut randomly.
You can give it a barcode, uh, in the form of what's called the, an,
a molecule that tells where that enzyme will cut in the genome. Let's say you,
Joe Rogan have, uh, a terrible gene that's causing heart disease.
We take this CRISPR system. We say,
here's where you need to go to cut. We can tell the enzyme to go and cut it,
put it into your cells. It'll go cut it and destroy the enzyme and delete it.
And you can also use it to cut the genome and insert new pieces.
So you can both subtract and add DNA at will now, not just randomly,
but what's important is you can tell it where to go.
And that's the big breakthrough.
And they're doing some experiments on human beings.
And I know there was something that they were doing.
I believe somewhere in Asia. If I remember correctly,
I believe it was China where they had done some
manipulation to people to help prevent aids and in the
process of doing so,
they may have boosted intelligence or the potential for intelligence,
which was so convoluted that my puny little brain cannot understand the study.
I was, I was, I had to go over the same paragraph like four or five times,
just try to figure out what the they were saying. Am I making any sense?
Uh, yeah, you are, you are. And that was a study that, that, uh,
I don't believe it's been published, but it's been reported, right. That, uh,
he is his name. His last name is he, uh, he took, um,
embryos and engineered them to delete CCR five gene,
which is required for HIV to infect cells. Now that was, we can, we,
most of us scientists think that that was, uh, reckless for the fact that, um,
first of all, HIV,
isn't a huge risk in China to one in a thousand chance of getting HIV.
There are plenty other thing, other things they,
that you could do that could be more helpful. Let's say, why not mutate? Uh,
what's called PSK nine to prevent heart disease,
which would probably have 50% to kill the boys. A boy. Um,
so anyway, it wasn't the most, um, risk, uh,
benefit ratio modification. That that's one thing, but the other is,
we don't know what happens when you cut genes in embryos.
Does it have changes to the DNA clock? Did it accelerate their aging?
Did it mess with other genes? Did it cut in other places and scrap those genes?
We don't know that yet.
And so that's why the scientific community had a negative reaction to it.
But what's interesting is that the scientific community and the press has pretty
much gone quiet on this. Imagine if this happened during the Bush era, we'd,
we'd have protesters all over the place,
it'd be outlawed and that hasn't happened.
And I think it's because we live in a world with a 24 hour news.
Cycle, but isn't that also because it's being, if it was during the Bush world,
I mean, where the protest would really take place, if it was done here,
the thing about things that are done in China or overseas, like, huh, it's like,
it's so far away like, well, let's keep an eye on 'em, you.
Know, like that's true. There is the fear that,
that some countries gonna engineer and, and army of humans. I mean,
we have the technology to do that. Yeah. Uh, we,
we believe we understand how to slow aging. Uh,
there are genes that predispose you to, to long life.
We could make offspring a family that would potentially live a lot longer,
but.
Is this something that can only be manipulated in embryos or in
fetuses?
No. Now we can do it in adults. Uh, actually, there's, there's a,
there are drugs that are in development to actually correct genetic diseases,
such as, uh, vision loss. Really?
Yeah. Dude, my eyes are gone. I could barely read like print on a laptop.
I, I, I need glasses to read my laptop. All.
Right. So, so we just put up a study online, uh, on a site. I archive.
Anyone can go there and see it. Just Google my name and bio archive.
B I O R X I V. Uh, reason.
That's interesting is that what we are showing is in mice,
at least we can reverse the age of the retina and restore the vision of old
mice.
What do I have to do?
Uh, well, I think you have to blow me a few more.
Times. Hey, come on, man. Well, you're gonna lose your job.
Let you gotta let me crack those kind of jokes. Sorry.
<Laugh> Harvard. I was joking.
I know I started it folks. Yeah. It's not his fault. What, so what,
what would someone, I mean, is this gonna be available to the general public,
any time in our lifetime?
Uh, I I'm trying my best. Uh,
we are hoping to do clinical trials starting in two years from.
Now. Really. And what would you do in those clinical trials?
Uh, so we'd reprogram the eye to be young again.
So we now know that there's a set of genes called reprogramming factors.
Also known as yamanarka factors that are from named after this Japanese
fellow who won the Nobel prize in 2012, these factors,
they used all over the world, even, probably in,
in high schools to reprogram skin cells, other cells,
to be what we call Flury pottent stem cells.
These are cells that can be used to make new organs or new blood cells. Mm.
But what people hadn't tried until recently was can you do this in a living
animal? Or are you just gonna mess it up? Uh, and what we found out is that,
uh, if you do it the wrong way, you mess up the animal and it'll die.
But what we've shown for the first time in this paper is you can do it in a safe
way. And not only that reverse the clock,
make the cells young and restore how they work and get back vision.
And what's the methodology. Right? Good.
Question. So the, the, the current method is using a virus that's on the market.
Uh, these are called AAVs at dental associated viruses. You put them in the eye,
they're already patients getting this in on the market. Really? Yeah.
Spark therapeutics is an example of a company that is Q you areing genetic
diseases in the eye with viruses or in a new world.
Most people don't know about it. Wow.
So what is the company again?
Jamie look got this spark genetic injury spark therapy. Jamie's already got it.
Look at that. Bam, Jamie Vernon in the house.
So these folks are already doing this to people.
So is this for people that are sort of desperate and they'll try something
experimental.
Right? Uh, well, they're desperate in the sense that there's no other choice,
no other cure. I mean, we're now curing genetic diseases.
Someone was just treated and cured of sickle cell anemia.
That's phenomenal. And that, you know,
I learned that that comes from malaria, right.
That was the idea that people were the resistance to malaria.
Was that trait from people that evolved in the area where they would get
malaria was also what led to people getting sickle cell. Correct? Correct.
So thi I learned that from tiffanyhanish, by the way,
amazing Tiffany shout out to Tiffany, that Luxe turn of stuff
is something that someone like me could take right now.
Uh, no, not easily. Your doctor would need to prescribe it.
And so if he did prescribe it, I could literally get vision back. Well.
This is not the same technology that I'm talking about it from my lab.
This is inherited retinal diseases, our commitment to R.
IRDs. This is gene replacement, not reprogramming the body to be young,
but it's the same virus that we'd use to correct.
Aging. Oh,
so they're using this for certain retinal diseases where they're
correcting it now, how is this bacteria fixing your vision?
Well.
The virus is adjusted to get the genes into the cells. That's all,
and these are benign viruses. They don't hurt you, but they're a carrier.
And maybe eventually we'll have other ways to do this.
But right now the virus is the best way. And in the mice to restore the vision,
we have this three gene combination of these yamenarka reprogramming genes.
We put them into the eye, uh, and then we turn them on with a drug. In fact,
the same drug that I took when I was in Africa called doxycyclin is the same
drug we can feed to the mice, turns on the reprogramming genes for a few weeks,
restores their vision back to a young mouse.
And then we just take away the doxycycin an antibiotic and the mice have their
vision back. And how long does it take.
For it starts deteriorating. Again, we.
Don't know yet how long, but we think that it's permanent. Wow.
Because the age of the cells has gone back. Those are young eyes again.
So you might have a whole full cycle from like, uh,
20 or 10 to 40 years old. Again, that's the.
Future that you'll get a delivery of this virus.
You'll take the antibiotic for a few weeks, be fully rejuvenated.
And the doctor says, come back in a couple of decades, we'll fix you again.
Or we'll give you some antibiotic in a couple of decades,
but then it gets really weird. If you have a,
if you engineer your children to have this system, if that ever happens,
let's imagine it could, we could do this right now with technology.
And you have people engineered to be able to be reversed in their age,
or let's say they have an accident and their optic nerve gets damaged, or they,
they lose their hearing from a bomb,
something that a spinal injury give 'em a dose, an IV of antibiotics.
And they become just like an embryo. They can rejuvenate,
they can regrow their optic nerve. Reg are their spine fixed back, back.
Like new, the, the vision thing.
Do you think that we're gonna see that in our lifetimes? I mean,
is this something that you're gonna see that's gonna be available to the general
public?
Well, so, uh, so I've got, I'm an entrepreneur, uh, as we discussed before. And,
uh, so one of the companies that I've started is exactly that raised money to be
able to make virus we're making it now takes a few million bucks.
And we'll hopefully with the FDA's approval injected into people's eyes. Now,
first, it won't just be guys like you, first of all,
we have to go into an area where it's FDA approvalvable,
which is a disease like glaucoma,
which is pressure in the eye or a maculargeneration that's our first goal.
But then if it's safe, why not do old eyes? Wow.
That's incredible. Now what about people with injuries? Yeah.
Well, yeah, you could theoretically put it into the spinal cord or give it,
give an IV, but people with.
Eye injuries.
Oh, for sure.
So one of the things we also did in this paper that we've put online is, uh,
we pinched the optic nerve. And what normally happens is it just degrades?
I mean, nerves don't grow back, right?
Unless you're a baby mouse or a baby human,
but we made those cells so young that the optic nerve grew back to the brain.
Wow. First time that's been able.
To, I know a guy to have it from fighting. He's got a,
a detached retina detached so bad that his, his vision and his right eyes,
like extremely poor shout out to Michael biing. Um,
do you think that that's something that inside of his lifetime,
they could see something use of this technology that could regenerate his eye?
Uh, well, you know, I get, get a lot of emails,
so I'm not really trying to over promise anything. Mm-hmm, <affirmative>, uh,
what I, what I think is possible is that, uh,
initially it'll be used for disease, um, a chronic disease,
then it'll be used for injuries like, like that, but fresh injuries.
I think it's probably totally likely to work better if it's fresh. Mm.
I don't know where this technology's going. I can imagine a lot.
We can all imagine, uh, that you could get vision back and people walking again,
but that's where this technology's going. We only,
so I described the discovery in the book as actually, what,
what happened while I was writing the book is we were making these discoveries
and they were remarkable. And so we,
I wrote them down in the book as we went along.
So people can see how it feels to be a scientist to make these discoveries. Uh,
but it's only been a year or less that we've known about this. Mm-hmm.
So imagine 50 years from now, what we can do, even 10,
it's gonna be a remarkable future.
It's very exciting. Now,
what kind of a timeline are you anticipating for bringing this to, you know,
people with injuries?
Uh, well, injuries, uh, already,
we have a study plan for spinal injury in mice, uh,
and that we'll probably know the results in less than a year. And then we could,
you know, as fast as the FDA allows us go into a clinical trial.
Now is the same scenario applicable for people with spine spinal
injuries as vision,
like people that have a more recent spinal injury will be more likely candidates
than people that have had older spinal.
Injuries. I, I think so that would just be my guess that it's easier to fix a,
a recent recently damaged system, anything in the body that's fresh,
but I wouldn't rule out anything. When we, when we first discovered this,
the experiment was to have a fresh injury, the pinching of the optic nerve.
But then I said to my student, why don't you just try old mice? And he said,
come on old mice, are you kidding me? How's that gonna work? Just try it,
just try it. Uh, so he did it and, uh,
in collaboration with another lab at Harvard, um, so that they're the experts.
Um, and so Bruce Cassandra is his name. So Bruce called me,
the professor at Harvard is 10 30 at night. I just got off a plane. He said,
David, you won't believe it. I didn't believe it. I just looked at the data.
It freaking worked. Wow. Old, micsis sing again. He said,
I wanna go down to the FDA and tell 'em about it.
Cause right now eye disease is typically, all you can do is slow them down.
And he's actually a reversal of lost function.
Now, does this apply to injuries as well?
Do you believe old injuries or just old macular degeneration?
Uh, we haven't tried old injuries now. My, uh,
we've done coglaucoma which is an old injury mm-hmm <affirmative> okay.
So theoretically, what we could do is at least with the existing nerves,
if they're still attached,
we should be able to rejuvenate those and make them work.
Better. Cause he has some vision in his eye.
So yeah. So that's possible that, that makes more sense, but very little.
Very limited in one eye. Yeah.
Well, we'll have to see.
And.